# Explainable Machine Learning for Characterizing Unknown Molecular Structures in Infrared Spectra

## Abstract

Various machine learning methods for detecting functional groups in infrared (IR) spectra have been developed to accelerate time-consuming and labor-intensive IR spectrum analysis. Nevertheless, existing machine learning methods have exhibited two fundamental limitations: (1) Existing methods do not incorporate prior knowledge of IR spectrum analysis during the training and inference processes. (2) Machine learning approaches are inherently black-box models, and therefore, the prediction results of existing methods lack explainability. To overcome these limitations, we propose the substructure-directed spectrum interpreter network (SSIN), a deep learning method for efficient and explainable functional group detection in IR spectra of unknown molecules. SSIN achieved a detection accuracy greater than 0.920 on the NIST database, which contains experimentally measured 8845 gas-phase IR spectra. Furthermore, SSIN accurately identified the absorption peaks corresponding to the existence of target functional groups. Quantitatively, human-readable IR spectrum analysis reports generated by SSIN with large language models showed 81-99% accuracy when compared with the ground-truth IR spectroscopy absorption table. Source codes and optimized models of SSIN are publicly available at https://github.com/ngs00/SSIN.

:exclamation: *The IR spectrum images in the uploaded analysis reports were removed due to license issues.*

---

## Usage

- ``train_ssin.py``: Train and evaluate SSIN based on k-fold cross validation.
- ``exec_ssin.py``: Execute the trained SSIN model to calculate detection labels and important absorption peaks. Then, make an IR spectrum analysis report through SSIN-LLM.

---

## Dataset

:exclamation: *The NIST IR spectrum dataset is not available in this repository due to the dataset license.*

- The IR spectrum dataset is available at https://webbook.nist.gov/chemistry.
- The metadata of the NIST dataset was uploaded to https://github.com/ngs00/ssin.

---

## Downloading Phi-4 for Generating Analysis Reports
Before executing ``exec_ssin.py``, you should install Phi-4 to generate a human-readable IR spectrum analysis report from the prediction results of SSIN. The installation process of Phi-4 is as follows.

1. Visit https://github.com/ollama/ollama to install the Ollama software.
2. Download Phi-4 in https://ollama.com/library/phi4 through the Ollama software.
